you
welcome
good morning everybody
lovely
lovely to see all of you we'll just wait
a few minutes while everybody is
entering
the room
uh
okay matthias am i ready are we ready to
start
i'd say so it's two minutes passed
fantastic great well good morning uh
everybody
and i welcome you to the lse
anthropology department
and to the fourth event in our tribute
to
our friend and colleague david graber
we began by launching his just published
book the dawn of everything a new
history of humanity which he completed
with the archaeologist david wengrow
just before he passed away
we then moved to his ethnography of
madagascar
uh followed by discussion of his book on
value and today we turn to debt
the first 5 000 years
david began this book with a very basic
question
why do we feel that we must repay our
debts
a question that was so important in the
wake of a debt crisis when millions of
homes were being reclaimed as an
economic crisis hit many parts of the
world followed by austerity measures all
in the name of curtailing sovereign debt
the book was published in 2011 just as
david became involved in occupying wall
street in the occupy wall street
movement
and it became an international
bestseller
david was writing that as he arrived at
the anthropology department at
goldsmiths where we first met
today i'm delighted to have two
wonderful scholars who shared those days
with david at goldsmiths
and who later also traveled alongside
him to lsc
the first is keith hart who was at that
time a professor of anthropology at
goldsmiths
and then a centennial professor at lse
and the second is marca suarez who had
just arrived as a phd student at
goldsmiths
and who david and i were to supervise
together and who joined the phd writing
up seminar when we moved to lse though
which were made at goldsmiths
let me tell you a bit more about keith
and maka before handing over to both of
them
keith uh keith hart is an anthropologist
and a self-taught economist who now
lives in paris and in durban
today he describes himself as a
full-time writer
he started out studying latin and
ancient greek he explored atlantic
society from the perspective of africans
in west africa north america the
caribbean britain france and south
africa
he has lived and worked in 24 countries
for the longest time in cambridge
he
has worn many hats he's been a
development consultant an experience
that led him to coin the term informal
economy
he's also been a gambler
he's been a journalist he's been a
publisher many people in this room will
know the prickly paradigm press which
actually began as keith's baby
keith is a man of many colors
but particularly of note for today is
that he is one of the foremost economic
anthropologists
he has some 200 items posted
at
academia.edu
and amongst his many publications are
money in an unequal world the memory
bank and hitman's dilemma
with chris chris han he has also edited
market and society the great
transformation today you know rethinking
relevance of kalpalani
and his co-authored economic
anthropology history and ethnography
critique
keith was on the internet internet long
before many of us and he calls himself a
natural network entrepreneur whose
research is mainly online
he co-founded the open anthropology
cooperative which released which reached
22 000 members
worldwide
at present keith is writing an
intellectual and political biography of
marcel moss whom he considers to be the
founder of the human economy
a term that he himself has developed
greatly in the last two decades and that
also inspired david
about to be published next spring is
self in the world connecting life's
extremes
which is an account of his personal
journey a call for academia to change
how we learn and hopefully an
inspiration for students of all ages and
interests
keith had a close association with david
for many years especially between 2001
and 2016.
after david passed away he published
anthropology as a revolutionary project
the political legacy of david graber
and also an obituary
for david
he has also published a long review of
the debt book david graber and the
anthropology of unequal society
there's no better anthropologist than
keith
to give us a grand engagement with the
grand debt and the grand david
so
let me turn now to maka marcus juarez
marca came into our lives uh at
goldsmiths she had trained in business
economics and political economy and she
knew that she needed to undertake a phd
in anthropology
she had a wonderful project which was to
explore how predatory financial
capitalism
through the loans of subprime mortgages
and unsecured employment in spain
had made a whole load of ecuadorian
migrants who in barcelona default on
their mortgage repayments
in the aftermath of the 2008 financial
crisis
she sought to understand how these
processes impacted all aspects of the
lives of these migrants
including you know in the most intimate
realms of gender kinship and family
and she wanted to understand in
particular how these migrants became
involved in the platform for people
affected by mortgages or lapa for its
spanish
acronym a grassroots social movement to
combat the foreclosures which were
evicting people from their homes in a
form of debt justice
after her phd makai returned to ecuador
where she co-founded kaleidos the center
for interdisciplinary
ethnography
a space which she co-directs as a
visiting professor at the university of
cuenca right now
she the work undertook she undertook in
ecuador had made her expand her fields
into medical anthropology and she
continues her concerns to explore
the contradictions faced by many people
who migrate to improve their living
conditions but find themselves
constantly underemployed over-indebted
striving to be part of an increasingly
ephemeral global middle class
maka recently became a part of the
department of anthropology at the
university of oslo
as assistant professor
uh but she's currently on leave and
joyce joins us now very early from uh
princeton the institute of advanced
studies where she's on a one-year
fellowship to work on her book
manuscript
it's called against the odds activism
debt and labor in times of crisis and
it's based on her work on ecuadorian
migrants in
barcelona a book we all await makkah
maka's work shares much in common with
david concerns around debt which are
grounded in movements taking action for
real democratic transformation
today she will provide a way to think
with david drawing on her experiences of
working with him while doing research on
subprime mortgages defaulting on these
debts and creative forms of social
organizing against indebtedness and
precarity despite all the odds
um so yeah welcome to to both of you and
before maybe i give the floor to you
maka let's first have
keith over to you keith thank you
good morning or midday it is for me
um
i'm gonna read this because
i just felt that
it was too risky to
[Music]
jazz the thing
david gray was dead the first 5 000
years was published in summer 2011.
in august september of that year he took
part in the first new york city general
assembly that formed the occupy wall
street movement
much of the contemporary world revolves
around claims we make on each other and
on things
ownership obligations contracts and
payments of taxes wages rents and fees
david addressed these through a focus on
debt in broad historical perspective
it's a central issue in global politics
today at every level of society
the class struggle between debtors and
creditors to distribute costs after the
long credit boom went bust in 2000 a day
is universal
david held that the social logic of debt
is revealed most clearly when money is
involved
following nietzsche he argued that money
introduced the first measure of unequal
relations
between buyer and seller creditor and
desert indeed one school of thought
holds that money is that
this includes the french and german
traditions
money was always both a commodity and
the debt token giving rise to much
political and moral contestation
especially in the ancient world
whereas rousseau traced inequality to
the invention of property
david located the roots of human bondage
slavery tribute and organized violence
in debt relations
the contradictions of indebtedness
escalating class conflict between
creditors and debtors
fed by money and markets led the first
world religions
to articulate notions of freedom and
redemption
often involving calls for that
cancellation
the book contrasts what he calls human
economies
with those dominated by money and
markets or commercial economies
these societies are not necessarily more
humane but they and i quote
they are economic systems primarily
concerned not with the accumulation of
wealth but with the creation destruction
and rearranging rearrangement of human
beings
they use money but mainly as what he
calls social currencies
which maintain relations between people
rather than being used to purchase
things
quote again in a human economy each
person is unique and of incomparable
value because each is in a unique nexus
of relations with others end quote
yet money forms make it possible to
treat people
as identical objects in exchange and
that requires violence
brutality is omnipresent
violence is inseparable from money and
debt
even in the most human of economies
where ripping people out of their
familiar context is commonplace
this is taken to another level when they
are drawn into systems like the atlantic
slave trade
slavery and freedom appared driven by a
culture of honor and indebtedness
culminates in the ultimate contradiction
of modern e-liberal economics a
worldview that conceives of individuals
as being social isolates
david
then organizes the world history and
money in four stages
the first urban uh civilizations from
mesopotamia onwards the axial age of
world religions the middle ages and what
he calls the great capitalist empires
that ended in 1971 when the us dollar
abandoned gold
money oscillates between two broad types
credit and currency or bullying
between money as a virtual measure of
personal relations like ious
and as impersonal things made from
precious metals
the recent rise of virtual credit money
may indicate another long swing in in in
money's central focus
ours could be he says a
multi-polar world more like the middle
ages than the last two centuries
it could offer more scope for human
economies or at least social currencies
but that crisis
might provoke revolutions perhaps the
institutional complex based on states
money and markets that sustain
capitalism
will be replaced by forms of society
more directly responsive to ordinary
people and their reliance on what he
calls everyday
communism
david's historical vision has no room
for a great transformation
in the 19th century and is therefore
opposed
not only to the marxists and the
liberals but also to carl palani
most anthropologists of the last century
conceived of the world's safer fieldwork
based ethnography
but another minority interest coexisted
with this i call this the anthropology
of unequal society
rousseau's discourse on inequality
launched modern anthropology as the
critique of of
unequal society
morgan and engels were heavily indebted
to him when they reconstructed human
history as the evolution of society from
a kinship matrix to states based on past
divisions
this genre was continued by levy stross
after the second world war by science
and by eric wolf
but with less explicit political content
than their predecessors
overlapping the millennium
this thread's main exponents have been
jack goody
and david greatner
goody sought to undermine western claims
to superiority
over the main asian societies
he downplayed the industrial revolution
that allowed europeans to take over the
world in the 19th century
following brodel goody referred to uh
preferred to point to the similarities
between industrial capitalism and what
he called the merchant cultures of
pre-industrial civilizations
he claimed that marx misread merchant
capitalism but he did not address marx's
case for treating industrial capital as
strategically different
weber 2 gets short shrift for suggesting
that modern capitalism differs from its
predecessors
given their common origins in the bronx
bronze age urban revolution
goodie reminds us that modern european
capitalism diffused faster to achieve
asia than the italian renaissance to
northwest europe
despite a barrage that is now me
despite a barrage of propaganda telling
us that we now live in the modern age of
science and democracy
our dominant institutions are still
those of agrarian civilization
territorial states and battle cities
landed property
warfare racism
bureaucracy literacy in personal money
long-distance trade
work as a virtue world religion and the
nuclear family
the rebellion of the bourgeoisie against
the old regime was co-opted in
mid-century
by national capitalism in a series of
political revolutions of the 1860s and
1870s
this severely set back humanity's
emancipation from inequality
[Music]
the shape of world society today
a remote elite of white middle-aged
middle-class men the men in suits
rule masses who are predominantly poor
darker female and young
the rich countries who can no longer
reduce themselves reproduce themselves
vainly try to stem the inflow of
migrants
our world resembles nothing so much as
the old regime in france before the
revolution
so but he may have a point in asking us
to reconsider how exceptional our
societies are
i've taken part in a conference and book
called that in the asian mediterranean
and there is
which was inspired by david's that book
he drew attention to the political
economy
underpinning a sequence of ancient
empires in western eurasia
from the persians and the classical
greeks through alexander's conquests
to republican and imperial rome and
finally the arab conquest of the
mediterranean
uh its logic hinged on the need this
political economy
is logic uh hinged on the need to
provision fast armies on prolonged
marches
that meant using precious metal coinage
sustained by a network of mines states
and mercenary soldiers
then converting conquered peoples into
slaves to be sold for the money needed
to complete the cycle
there seems little doubt that western
empires
from 1500 to 1800 relied on a similar
lobster
but they were unable to take over the
world until industrial capitalism raised
their technological
competence to a far higher level than
the rest
marxists and liberals agreed that the
world change was taking place in the
19th century britain
but hegel's historical model was very
different from marxism's
successive stages that is from feudalism
to capitalism to socialism his three
phases were based on the the family and
the land
the market economy of urban civil
society and the modern state
respectively
these now coexisted under the
coordinating guidance of the states
both palani and marx
missed the revolutions of the 1860s and
70s well marx had the better excuse than
polany since he was living through them
these revolutions installed a new class
alliance
in the leading countries
based on a partnership between
capitalists and the traditional land
forces that i call
national capitalism
this new alliance soon spawned legal
conditions for modern corporate
corporations
as well as a massive expansion of state
property and the bureaucratic revolution
at all levels of the economy mass
production and consumption were the
results
thomas piketty's book on capital was the
smash hit of our times apart from babies
of course
it was based on serious economics up to
two centuries of national income
accounting for a few rich countries
and economies who can call balzac can't
be all
i identified three reasons for his
success first pikachu brought inequality
back onto the mainstream agenda
just as occupy wall street did with its
uh we are the 99
and this touched the nerve
um
after
neoliberal responses to the financial
crisis
included bailing out the rich and me
and making the poor pay
second
pikachu's or argument rests on two
simple equations describing the
relationship between capital and labor
over the last 200 years he uses these to
demonstrate the capital share of
national income must always increase
it's unlikely that seeming historical
diversity in the last two centuries can
be captured by timeless categories and
equations
third against the notion that
capitalists make their money from
producing competitively for profit
picati claimed that property was a
growing component of wealth
inheritance and rent were neglected
factors in distribution today
i would argue despite the obvious
correspondences and lingering influence
of the agrarian agrarian civilization
there is something special about the
plutocracy built up in recent decades
the rise of modern corporations comes
from their being granted the rights of
individual citizens by the u.s supreme
court in 1884
and they now combined those rights with
their long-held special privileges like
the limited liability for debt
even the romans not noticed as demo as
champions of democracy
limited the spending of the rich on
political campaigns
the u.s supreme court recently refused
to accept any restriction on corporate
political spending since it would
infringe their human rights
they also
allow companies exemption from
government rules
on grounds of religious beliefs
these corporations once built their
wealth by producing industrial
commodities for profit at prices cheaper
than their competitors
now they rely on extracting rents
transfers sanctioned by political power
rather than on producing for profit in
competitive markets thus
big pharma makes more money from patents
granted by congress than the entire
medicare budget
sonny makes 75 of his revenues not from
machines
but from dvds that are reproduced almost
without cost from movies already sold in
cinemas they call duplicating these
electronic movies piracy
goldman sachs retrieved from the u.s
treasury had a hundred percent of face
value the 90 billion
that it lost that was lost by insurance
china aig in the 2000s and that crashed
these rent seekers are not punished for
stealing from the public
but are bailed out by our taxes and held
up the shining examples of super-rich
consumption
to a public that has exchanged equal
citizenship for brethren
circuses or reality tv
this is decadence there are no longer
any political solutions to our economic
problems as a result
marx held
the capitalist profit subordinated iran
and interest to his logic
this is why he and engels thought that
victorian england held the future of the
world economy
new phrases of capitalist development
and decline have been identified ever
since
the american macroeconomist dean baker
provides much insight into ransier
capitalism in the us today
selling stuff for profit means adding
value through production rent seeking
and i quote
wikipedia
is an attempt to derive economic rent by
manipulating the social or political
environment in which economic activities
occur
rather than by adding value
grants and interest that is banking
no longer take their scale form and
function from industrial capitalist
production for profit as marx insisted
in capital
as the focus of political economy tipped
away
from industrial production in the
broadest sense towards rent
derived from political privilege
it is hard to see how the richest 1
today could have done so well in the
last three decades
otherwise than by this means given the
overall stagnation of production in real
wages in this period
the digital revolution in communications
is highly relevant since many intangible
commodities can now be copied easily at
no cost
if you steal my cow i can no longer milk
it but no one loses out if i copy your
song
entertainment is the fastest growing
sector of the world economy after
finance
in the infancy of national
capitalism uh before the first world war
did markets become more monopolistic
than before
national capitalism's rise to dominance
after the first world war is essential
to understanding
today's economic crisis
digital retail management regimes now
being installed around the world
illustrate the dominance of political
and legal coercion in the economy now
rent seeking now trump's value-added
through production
the war over intellectual property
escalates to ever higher levels of
absurdity
and the rise of big tech has extended
corporate command and control
like never before
with marx and engels i believe that the
machine revolution can be a force for
greater economic democracy
but the open source and free software
movements have lost the influence they
once promised
our main hope is to mobilize global
networks to develop the democracy
knowing that we are faster and more
and there are more of us than ben
now this was certainly david graber's
project and i will end by
with
well even for me is something like an
anconian
davies book is or will be the biggest
bestseller by an anthropologist ever
even over ruth benedict's patterns of
culture the previous front nut runner
in 2011 he spent sabbatical leave from
goldsmiths in new york where he was able
to promote the book heavily before
becoming a leading figure in the occupy
wall street movement
he was invited by the german president
to debate on national television with
the leader of the social democratic
party and soon after that that sold
30 000 copies in two weeks in germany
in the previous decade his books were
translated into many languages
and his strongest following i would
think
is in japan korea and china
that's phenomenal success was not an
accident or a freak of creative genius
anthropology narrowed its scope in the
last century
to meet the needs of academic
bureaucracy
and lost its public appeal in the
process
davis set out to write a big book with
big ideas that allowed readers to place
themselves in history
anthropologists in adopting fieldwork
based ethnography as their standard
settle for narrow localism and the
truncated vision of their own history
finding in ethnography a replacement
for racist colonial empire while
ignoring the fragmentation of world
society
into many myopic nationalisms
david bypassed all of this
to resurrect the victorian polymath and
the world thanked him profusely for it
but there were other strings to his
methodological bone
chief of them
the ability to combine academic life
with revolutionary policies
when his colleagues were mostly trapped
in universities committed to
bureaucratizing capitalism
from the time he was a graduate student
he trained himself to write accessibly
for the general public
he wrote each piece
twice
once for himself and another for
everyone else
david's intellectual success in a
curtailed lifetime drew on
self-conscious methods
vision imagination
endurance through hardship for sure
reading with no bounds
love of comparative ethnography
writing what nature described as
a willing a preference to be
understood rather than admired and not
for knowing and over acute readers
also cause active participation in
democratic politics
and returning to anthropology's original
mission as the study of humanity as a
whole
you can call that genius if you like
i prefer to call it a personal synthesis
built on disciplined hard work over an
extraordinary range of human activities
if only we could each aim to emulate him
at least in some respects
that's it
thank you keith thank you very much for
grand vision of
how to read that and how to understand
what david was trying to do and
i'm now going to turn over to makkah
for another kind of reading of working
with david
yes
thank you very much ulta thank you very
much keith too
um it is a different kind of reading i
will i will switch scales a little bit
but um
good morning or evening or night to
everyone here today it's great great to
be with you
can you hear me well
okay um the title of the talk is
thinking about debt with david graber
and lapa
let me begin by saying
that this is a thought experiment a
phrase david often used and that i find
really useful
in this talk i'd like to propose an
approach to debt the first 5000 years
that connects the book to david's
earlier work on fragments of an
anarchist anthropology
and his latest work with david wengrow
on the dawn of everything
i think there are many different
readings of the book of debt
my own reading of david's work is in
light of 10 years of ethnographic
research with latin american migrants in
spain who became involved in the
country's largest movement for the right
to housing the platform for people
affected by mortgages
or lapa as i will call it for its short
spanish acronym
my research focuses on the relationship
between political mobilization mortgage
debt and transnational migration
my interlocutors were being foreclosed
and evicted from their homes which were
bought during the housing bubble
on average they owed over 250 000 euros
they joined lapa in despair and out of
guilt for not paying their debts
the movement helped them transform their
guilt into outrage by shifting the grand
narrative from individual failure into a
counter narrative on massive financial
fraud
in what follows i engage with david's
concept of debt and freedom
trying to illuminate some of the
challenges i ran into while theorizing
what that meant to my interlocutors and
fellow activists
so
it was january 11 2012
i had just returned to london from a
preliminary field visit to barcelona
david was on leave that year and in new
york but was on a short visit to london
most of his time
and his mind space
were however still in new york where he
had inspired and was collaborating with
the occupy movement
as we ate some delicious diet food one
of his favorite activities
david detailed his time with occupy
meanwhile i was trying to get a word in
and everyone who knows grave knows this
is hard to figure out my own research
in between dishes of prawn panang's
charcoal duck lots of white rice and
thai iced tea
david turned around and said i quote him
what's interesting here is not only why
has that become the focus of this
movement but why it has been so
effective
it's notorious that that is very hard to
organize around we keep talking about
dead strikes that this step towards that
and everybody keeps trying to come up
with a formula but it's incredibly
difficult
part of the reason why is because this
sort of all morality is very hard to
like convince people it's not their
fault
what's interesting here is you have a
really effective broad grassroots
movement focusing on that
you could ask why that becomes a focus
and why it's worked in a certain way
so the question is in what way so let me
begin with fragments trying to answer
this question and it's relation to the
book on that
in fragments david describes a number of
invisible spaces where direct forms of
democracy are already taking place
to him it is in these spaces that i
quote him the potential for insurrection
and the extraordinary social creativity
that seems to emerge out of nowhere in
revolutionary moments actually comes
unquote
in the book on death on the other hand
david defines the principle of communism
as quotes the foundation of all human
sociability
unquote
communism is implies a spaces free of
debt in which all people are able to
contribute to a common project
given the abilities they already have
as he explains unlike hierarchy
communism is not based on relationships
of precedent or status but of
cooperation and unlike exchange
communism does not intend to end
relationships by paying back what is
code but rather building a sociality in
which one aspires to live in
communism would then be the moral
principle of economic life operating at
the heart of the invisible spaces
suggested by david in his anarchist
anthropology
so i want to turn or give you an
ethnographic vignette to analyze how
this moral principle organized the
everyday life everyday realities lived
by latin american migrants to complicate
david's theory
hector was a 48
year old man at the time of our
interview and his family was able to get
what many families desired at lapa
canceling their mortgage debt after
being foreclosed
in a spain mortgage law dictates that a
mortgage home is not the sole collateral
to the debt
a bank can collect on any remaining debt
after the house is auctioned
the predatory nature of this law
translates into debts in the hundreds of
thousands for my interlocutors after
they have lost the property
so full cancellation of a mortgage debt
felt indeed like a victory as hector put
it
oddly then most
american migrants ended up celebrating
loser that losing their houses to the
bank in exchange for a full debt
cancellation
however hector came to another
realization right at the same time
he and his family had no place to live
his wife's monthly income of 600 euros
could not pay for a place to rent not if
they wanted to pay the bills and have
enough to live
they were left with one option la paz
obra
a project based on the reoccupation of
buildings belonging to banks rescued
with public funds and which sat empty
for years
the idea was to relocate families like
hectors
the names of la paz project is a play on
words
every large bank in spain has an ovra
social a philanthropic entity supporting
cultural events or alleviating social
problems in catalonia for instance they
often fund catalan language promotion or
similar social events
lapac thought it would establish its own
strategy for solving real social
problems by occupying empty buildings
and using them for what they saw as its
intended purpose house people
la pals la paz housing reoccupation
project for evicted families was
criticized by both the left and the
right
for leftist and long-term squatters it
was not radical enough because the
strategy was not a permanent
reappropriation
for conservatives occupation was a crime
and a threat to private property
for my interlocutors it was a respite
but not an optimal solution
hector family is just one example
there were a significant number of
single mothers and their children
unemployed or in low-paid jobs which
constituted a great portion of subprime
mortgages in spain
and this has also happened in other
places like in the us
when i interviewed hector and his family
they had been living in the occupied
building for four months
the experience had been very difficult
for them and they hoped to buy an
apartment again in the future
hector was just one case among many
people for whom home ownership was still
the preferred housing option and a
marker of success
why did my interlocutors want to own a
house or an apartment rather than
occupying one or even renting it
to try and answer this question i'd like
to connect that with the dawn of
everything
one of david's most important invitation
in his book on death is to move away
from an openly present language of death
thinking with david means questioning
why people narrate their lives in the
idiom of death and examining whether and
how an alternative approach is even
possible
david goes to extraordinary lengths to
illuminate the very mechanisms that
prevent us from living without debt
the biggest endeavor of his book to my
mind is showing us a path to freedom
real freedom we can already access if we
choose to recognize that many big
theories are in fact forms of
reproducing a ruling class or the
legitimacy of the state
david knew wholeheartedly that
anthropology is uniquely well placed to
document the sites of moral and monetary
embeddings
in the dawn of everything david along
with david gwengrove
characterized freedom as the potential
for doing things otherwise through three
concepts of freedom that they present
first freedom to move or relocate so the
idea of being free to live leave a place
in the face of danger or otherwise
then freedom to refuse borders or how
not to be bound by hierarchy
finally freedom to shape new social
realities by choosing what is at the
center of our existence
i'm interested here in following the
first
fruit reading freedom of movement as it
is keen understanding why latin american
migrants became indebted in the first
place and why they would consider doing
it again today
there are two key moments
in which latin american migrants journey
when they incur into death so these are
essential
first when they decide to travel
irregularly to spain
the trip required anything from 4 000 to
5 000 u.s dollars
which were almost invariably a debt
acquired in their home countries in
order to move to spain
the second moment is buying a mortgage
property
this was done in order to bring their
families from latin america to state
migrants needed to show adequate proof
of housing buying a home was the fastest
route to re reunifying with their loved
ones
mainly moving children from latin
america to spain
let me illustrate this with another
ethnographic
the thing is i didn't even want to buy a
flat i was trying to rent one said juan
he had been trying to rent a flat in
order to bring his wife paulina and
their three children from ecuador to
spain under a family reunification
scheme
they had been apart for nearly two years
it was his reunification application
that pushed him to look for a new place
to live since he needed to demonstrate
to immigration services proof of
suitable accommodations for his family
in spain
like many other migrants juan was aware
that it was not possible to accommodate
family life in a small bedrooms that
were often no more than lined adjacent
mattresses on the floor or a few bunk
beds in the room
migrants usually migrants usual shared
split rentals were legally and
physically inadequate for bringing
families to spain
juan moved to a rent juan wanted to rent
a flat because he thought he would not
qualify for a mortgage
to him private property was a superior
form of housing but in addition he was
well aware of the ease private property
meant when faced with spanish
immigration services
each autonomous community has its own
process for showing proof of adequate
housing in catalonia the regional
government through its department of
family and social well-being was
responsible for providing a report
asserting the quality of that housing
according to juan if one had a rental
agreement the department sent someone to
check your home to know that it was
indeed as you described they sent
someone
to see that no no one else was living
with you and that you were indeed able
to house others particularly children
however as hound juan explained if one
had proof of property they never sent
anyone to check anything at all
how to think then of this double bind of
debt as the absence of freedom and its
condition of possibility is one of the
things that reading david's three books
together allows me to reflect upon
i want to circle back to david's initial
question
why was this movement so effective in
organizing around debt
as an activist of lapa but also as an
anthropologist i believe the movement
was effective because it stayed with the
problem of debt it never tried to solve
it but showed when it became excessive
and violent
the basic requirements the movement has
long advocated for include stopping home
evictions without proper rehousing
making mortgage properties the sold
collateral to a loan implementing rental
caps and increasing social housing
availability
although the spanish movement for the
right to housing does not seek that
jubilee which david advocated for in his
book it offers us a space to politicize
debt relations
david never dismissed lapa as a bunch of
reformists which several leftist
activists and his scholars did and
continued to do david was more
interested in how people organized
around that collectively than what
people did with debt individually
it's important to highlight that in over
a decade lapa has gone from a small
group of activists meeting weekly in
2009 to becoming the largest movement
for the right to housing with over 220
nodes around the spain
and weekly assemblies that gather to
this day
thousands of individuals to discuss
mortgage debt and political mobilization
lapa is an effective intervention into a
growing reality of financial predation a
movement that has learned to respond to
injustice collectively and a socially
diverse space where ideological
conceptualizations
of debt or of occupation
and really of many other issues can
actually change lapa is not an example
of how david thought we should deal with
debt and yet david was always ready to
learn from others other people's
experiences and strategies
this was very much david a self-absorbed
but incredibly generous activist mentor
scholar and friend
while at goldsmiths and the lse i often
thought i had gone in for a supervision
but came out knowing about occupy for
java or his friendship with anton
newcombe the lead singer from the brian
johnston massacre
yet upon listening back to each of our
conversations
of which i recorded many i found
detailed guides for thinking
differently about what i was working on
they didn't seem terribly evident at the
time because he was never telling me how
to think
rather david was thinking with me based
on his own ethnographic examples and
political aspirations
this i believe is a perfect reflection
of how he thought and wrote
he was never trying to tell people how
to think but was inviting us into his
own way of connecting seemingly
disconnected phenomena
often going back several thousand years
in order to do that
let me just end by thanking today jorge
nunez for thinking with me many of the
ideas advance here and alpha for the
opportunity to engage with david's
legacy at a time when his ideas are so
greatly needed and he is dearly missed
to everyone here today
thank you for choosing to do exactly
what david said occurs in mourning and
other acts of memorialization
these are an essential part of the labor
of people making
so let us continue making our
relationships to each other matter in
ways that shape the futures we want to
build
thank you very much
thank you
thank you so much maka
um
it's a lovely presentation of your own
material and how it enables us to think
with david
um i'm going to open up the floor for
questions
if you can use the raised hand function
uh on your at the bottom of your screen
so that would be great
i can't see everybody in one go i've got
nine pages on my screen
so um please use the raised hand
function for comments
and questions
um i'm just starting to see if i have
got um people already waiting
uh
okay
i don't see any questions at the moment
so while people gather thoughts
perhaps if i may um
if i may ask both of you to address
something um
which has
uh which stuck out from to me from um
keith hart's um presentation
and something that has that continues to
trouble me and something that i'm trying
to work through with david
um you know keith you had this wonderful
kind of grand
vision of
what is happening uh in terms of the
global economy um
where marx is right and wrong and where
goody takes us and
you know
a global history uh which is grounded in
political economy
and um you ended by telling us so
somewhere in the middle you had this
sentence you know which which was that
there are no longer any political
solutions to our economic problems
um
and
this is you know i mean very very
counter to david's project as i
understand it because it's all about
possibilities you know that we can just
create
these communities uh you know different
versions of lapa for example um
and you know or occupy and grow them and
grow them and there are all these
different spaces and the solutions to
the world
uh lie in in political in political
possibilities and in a way you know the
whole
the kind of wider political economy is
is is put aside especially in the last
book you know in in the dawn of
everything we're looking at different
kinds of possibilities of making life
and living together and
uh you know it's the old kind of tension
right that we had an anthropology
between ideology and political economy
and what is the relationship between the
two and of course this is the tension
between within between marxist debates
and marxism and anarchism and
and you know so i i wanted you to
reflect on that more um into david's
vision and in in relation to what you're
suggesting of world history
uh and and and mark had to maybe
challenge you a little bit more as well
you know with hector for example you
know your
your case that we follow through he
joins this possibility of a different
you know this this this movement for a
different possibility
but in the end you tell us that you know
what he wants really is actually to just
you know he do it again he don't you
know he wants to own the house you know
and um
he doesn't want to just be in the space
of uh
of
of reclaiming
uh uh you know of of of squatting and in
reclaimed uh reclaimed houses
so um
yeah
it would be it's it would be good to
have your reflections i guess more on
the limitations of debt uh in in terms
of
the relationship between political
economy
and um
political possibilities you know which
is what kind of david trump's over
political economy
okay um that's a big kind of question
i've got deborah and various other
people waiting but maybe keith and mike
come here i turn to you okay
um
i think there's there's less
contrast between david and my viewer
politics than than you indicated
especially in the that book i mean he he
more or less finishes the analysis in
1971.
and says almost nothing about what might
happen later
which is to say that
he
felt and i have often felt that we
and i suppose hegel and marx also felt
that
we can
build a picture of the past because it's
happened but
and that
should influence what we do in future
but we can't really predict what that's
going to be so
in my view that in the 20th century the
world
built itself around
nation states which were in various
forms
uh
vehicles for the development of
capitalism
and uh it is true that the the dollar
going off gold inaugurated the end of
that system
in my view
that what we have been living through is
the
decay of national capitalism
of course the the reagan thatcher
county revolution against post-war
political economy which was generally
speaking in the interest of greater
equality and public services
raising ordinary families incomes
they have taken over and have
essentially
uh in a way that has never been seen
before hijacked the world
economy for the benefit of a very small
number of people
and
i mean even though it was always the
case that money and
politics were
handing gloves uh the
the current
siphoning of wealth
uh via politics into the hands of very
few very rich people
has no precedent in the modern world in
fact
the main precedent would be um
the period you know the gilded age
but there is no president in the 20th
century for what's going on now
and
and so what was
and in in
the means of that was uh
the free flow of capital without
political
influence
and that was used to
essentially undermine organized labor
and
the state and all the other
uh
means that were developed after
uh to engineer the biggest boom in world
history in the interest to a large
extent of most people
so what we're living through is the
progressive decay
of something that's had the
the the the the
uh
is is fundamental
institutions that we still use as the
rhetoric of of common existence
and
we don't know how it's going to end i
mean so we don't know what is going to
happen next we could
i mean there could be democratic
revolutions more likely authoritarian
and fascist regimes springing up
everywhere
world war three i think is a definite
possibility
uh
and you know so
my work is
is concerned with
helping people to place themselves in
history so that when things happen that
we can't really predict they might be in
the better uh decision better place to
do
what they can with the people who
support what they believe in
and i i really think you know if you
look at anarchism i mean you know i mean
wall street was was roundly attacked by
the social democrats the marxists and
everybody else for not making any
proposals
you know and and and this was considered
to be a weakness
but you know i think
if you read the
uh
you know the democratic budget of what
it is called i mean
he's saying that the task of
anarchist demonstrations is
to behave as if we were free and to
persuade other people to think that they
might be
but not to
you know
make demands on the
existing government the best we can do
is show that they're full of
and and and even risable
you know so so so that i i mean i don't
think that anarchism has ever had
a kind of program
of you know i mean you can talk vaguely
about let's all be friends and join
together and have communities
but uh you know
i mean the world is seriously going to
hell because we have lost
the framework of national capitalism
that at his peak gave us the post-war
three decades and we have not found a
world society that will secure human
interests
and i don't know how we get from here to
there
but that's the reason why i say
that there are no longer political
solutions
to
our economic problems because our
economic problems are global
and our politics are national
and the national parties has been hijab
by a bunch of get rich
get rich quick
criminals
thanks keith
great well thank you also for the
question and let me place
my answer somewhere between the the
bigger um
theoretical narratives that we were
talking about and also the the the
scales and temporalities at which we are
um talking about this right so when
we're seeing 5000 years of debt and so
on of everything it goes even further
back than that
um it's interesting in the this example
that i'm giving and of course i'm doing
this this on purpose here um i'm looking
at it on the day-to-day of what that
looks like right so
uh in the very optimistic perhaps
reading of david and the more
pessimistic
view that keith just just gave us i do
place the pa somewhere in between that
because it is a space that is
politicizing that that is being able to
change narratives um that is finding
solutions to the real problems of today
i don't have a home so i need a place to
live but it's also full of
contradictions and full of tensions um
and i think this is very much uh
what anthropology shows us right
uh the conflicts and contradictions in
which we live um day-to-day and this is
exactly what was happening to hector he
was very much politicized he had become
an activist this was already very hard
these are working-class migrants who
were working in construction jobs
cleaning um so they had never been
political actors before
and they were they had already
transformed themselves into even calling
themselves activists
so there was a transformation for sure
but we also need to understand this in
the number of different instabilities in
which there are living labor
instabilities migratory instabilities
housing instabilities so
in the context of spain for instance
renting was
a very limited option contracts are for
one to three years prices have
skyrocketed over the at least past
decade and way before that already so
really having a place to live where you
can
foresee how much you'll be paying as
your rent and i'm sure this will be
something that resonates with anyone who
lives in a relatively big city at this
point
it becomes very very difficult so in
many ways they were forced into private
property they did have a very specific
conception of private property that
meant you know a better form of housing
and and this is something that the pow
was also trying to change but it didn't
really have that many alternatives
because the recuperated buildings in the
case of vector for instance was a
building that was thought for young
professionals that had single um one
bedroom apartment and so actually his
family was living in two bedroom in two
apartments so his children lived in one
apartment he lived in another one and
they had all these different dynamics
that were changing so there are some
idealized visions of what family life
might be and that can be conflicting but
all of these things come into play when
we're trying to think about shifting the
ground underneath us so i think that
this is something that the ethnographic
work allows us to think with david's
work and it's how do we face our
realities with this
tools theoretical tools political tools
but how do we do it on a sort of
day-to-day so
that's
i'm wrestling with this of course i
don't have a solution but kind of what
it's tried to show thanks maka mathias
has a direct follow-up uh and then i
will hand over to deborah
right yeah so which is uh directed to to
you marker
first of all i really enjoyed that you
uh you know if when you went to to david
he would uh share with you his stories
uh and in order to allow you to think
about your own work and in a way what
you're doing is giving us the reverse
right giving us your stories but
actually through them really allowing us
to also engage with david's work in very
interesting ways
so it's just a direct a quick follow-up
on
the question that's alpha asked about
hector and why
you know kind of in relation to what you
said that they don't reject that but
they stayed with them but were kind of
fighting uh the excesses
um and i was wondering whether that was
also partly because as you said hector
kind of you know his ultimate ideal was
still to own a house
and whether there is there was perhaps a
kind of failure to to see that
ultimately of course
house ownership is a myth especially for
the younger generations right they will
never own a house they will
always only borrow a house and i wonder
whether you know whether that was also
kind of
something that was discussed there or
you know whether these ideals of house
ownership whether those you know were
challenged within that organization or
or not
yes so
one of the things why people were
willing to go into debt again
is because they had learned that they
that can be stopped
and they can stop paying their debts
when they become excessive when they
become violent so there was a renewed
understanding
of what default meant default is not a
personal failure default is not you not
being able to fulfill
a promise right to them that is a means
to an ends it allows them for freedom of
movement in the sense of bringing
families and having places to secure
their children livelihoods many of these
migrants were thinking perhaps i'd want
to move back to latin america and either
grow older there go see my parents they
lived further in between and private
property or the property they owned in
barcelona meant my children will have a
secure place to live they will not go
through what i went through they won't
live in bunk beds they won't live in
instability of housing so there were all
this other projects that they were
working through
so debt was still seen as a way of
getting something that
was bigger than just you know being a
proprietor so it wasn't so much about
being the proprietor of your home but
what that security of housing allowed
for and when debts get excessive and
they get violent
there's a collective movement that will
fight that excessive indebtedness so but
there is a tension of you know the
morality of debt should we pay them
should we not how do we relate to it so
it's a great question because i think
it's very much lit in what um the
movement is doing
great thank you maka thanks um i'm going
to hand over to deborah and then there's
a flurry of kind of chat questions and
and maybe we will have a couple of those
together before we end deborah first to
you
thanks both for a very interesting um
kind of counter position of two
different perspectives one very grand
and the other one quite particular
and and keith you've always been very
provocative in telling us all that we
are wasting our time doing ethnography
and you should all like look at the
grand picture just like you and david do
but i think that listening to maka shows
us that actually the ethnography part
has got a very important role to play
and particularly this sort of interested
me you got your hector who's kind of
strung out between the notion that debt
is the most important thing in his life
or property might be the most important
thing and that kind of mapped on to what
keith was saying which is that david
said property was not actually the most
important thing it was dead so i just
wonder whether the nature of the
specific analysis david puts forward
which is quite a sort of um particular
one he overthrows marx weber and all
these other kind of theorists and he's
got his own line
actually needs to be a much more
pluralistic one much like hector who
also seemed to have a pluralistic
approach to how to actually solve the
problem it wasn't like he had to
actually isolate my real problem here
his property or my real problem here is
that he kind of had to do a sort of
hodgepodge type um you know
social action which perhaps didn't even
really fully understand the nature of
his problem but ultimately just tried to
find a way of dealing with it it's more
of thought than a question but anyway
well
i don't know why you put in the blog for
ethnography before making that point
uh i i just want to say
that i'm writing a biography of marcel
mose who was a very political person he
was a friend of juarez before he was
assassinated he was
a
a public figure
in the socialist government around the
time when
when when the gift was made
but soon everything went banana shape
for him in the middle twenties and
he took up the uh
a job of um directing
the institute of ethnology having spent
in his whole life only two weeks
in morocco doing anything like
ethnography
and this was because
as i found as a teacher when
especially in
um
[Music]
especially
in the gift
he he he wanted the gift to be a kind of
clarion call for what he called
an economic movement from below
relying more on you know
the salience of human interests and
relations and so on
but
you know the french capitalism of this
day made it very implausible
to get people into the hustings
for on behalf of personal relations that
the morrow has cancelled
uh and and and so
he found in the
in the in in in the uh uh ethnography of
of uh archaic gift exchange first of all
a vision of politics that is supremely
personal
and uh
and also a method of ethnography
that invites people to to take
the
their own stories and beliefs
and possible means of action from it
i mean there's uh
he he gave lectures in in the institute
were very popular for the intelligence
here
three of them led by uh
uh
for africa
anyway three surrealists
uh challenged him once and said
they realized that none of them had the
same idea of what his uh
uh
voice lectures were about so they did an
experiment and sure enough that's how it
turned out they were very angry about
this they they cornered him after one of
his lectures and said don't you care
about getting your message across to the
audience
and he said
far be it for me to think i should
impose my thoughts on your on on you
gentlemen
i hope to help you to discover your own
and that's why he became you know for
two generations the inspiration for
the first ethnographers in france
and he gave up politics and he sat there
and he had you know drank with his
students he gave improvised lectures he
chatted endlessly
gave up all his financial journalism
and i have a friend called nicholas
adele
keith sorry
so sorry
sorry
can i just finish this yes please i have
a friend called nicholas sat down
who gave me a phrase that is helping me
to write the book
he said that
um uh
the masermos is a a concrete dialectic
dietician
and as a teacher i tried to teach world
history over and over again and always
failed i blamed the students for lacking
a historical vision
but in fact it's a lot easier to
insert yourself creatively into a novel
or an ethnography or a movie than it is
into something issued by the politburo
or your professor in the form of a
lecture
so uh uh
i i have i'm actually going through a a
period of massively upgrading the value
that i place on ethnography
at least
for readers
if not necessarily for practitioners
thanks keith uh for that and uh
hopefully you know we'll hear more about
moss next week as well from kia martin
and aisha chabaksha who will be
discussing fragments there are a few
questions in the chat and although we
finished the seminar at 12 15 please we
will not be offended if you leave this
room uh right now but i would like to um
give maka and keith the opportunity to
look at some of these questions and um
maybe michael you're still with us so if
you would like to ask your question in
just like a minute and also maybe monika
and we've got jonas whose hand is raised
so maybe we'll have all of you speak uh
together and then and and then hand the
floor back to
makkah and um and keith uh before we
wrap up
this great uh sessions that is doing
it's very um lovely to see this work on
david graber coming forth um my question
was simply taking uh if if we won
glasses graber's idea of exchange or
theory of value as
um every exchange that we make um
demonstrates or or performs the world
that we live in some people perform
worlds where they're more important they
oh you know they own something and
somebody owes them money some people
perform worlds where it's a sort of gift
exchange we're all equal
um and so
those performances um
in some sense if they if they don't feel
very fair to some people then they have
to be backed up is is does david graber
um
uh
what is the role do you think of
violence or hidden violence um in say
performing a relationship of debt we are
important you aren't pay us the money
that you owe us
but also
some people want to pay this debt back
they feel like they owe it in
it is the opening chapter so maybe that
relationship
how do people feel about the idea that
people fall into
that does that mean that violence isn't
important in
uh keeping hold of a
of a feeling of debt or of any other
type of social relationship i hope that
as i understand that violence is
absolutely central uh to david's
arguments but um maybe we'll hand over
to monica and then and then jonah
okay
thank you for uh giving me the chance to
ask my question um
yeah and thank you very much marca for
your talk and sharing your fascinating
work so i basically gonna read my
my question i put it in the chat
so one of the main points that stick
with me uh what you were talking about
uh is that by politicizing that
collective responses um to that and and
interventions actually against the
financialization of everyday life become
possible
and here i see many links to the ongoing
struggles in latin american feminist
movements so especially in argentina but
not only
and also to the work of scholars like
lucy caballero and veronica gargo and
they are examining the relationship
between that and social reproduction and
so i would like to ask how uh would you
relate this feminist reading of that to
your work and also how you would relate
it to david's approach to that
thank you
thanks thank you jonah
all right thank you
um one of the things that i was really
struck by um
in both presentations was um
this sort of normative
strand that seems to run quite deeply in
david's analysis
and it really struck me in in marcus um
marcus michael was talking about three
ideas of freedom in david's most recent
book so it seems to me that this
normative idea of freedom is
very essential and basically the idea
that in some social arrangements there's
going to be more freedom than others and
the ones in which there's more freedom
is actually better you know freedom is
better and that's really striking
because it also feels like something
that we can as individuals as people we
can kind of we sort of know what that
means in some way what freedom means
i wonder if that's kind of linked a bit
to his appeal
and then that really seems to run very
kind of counter to a lot of i feel my
training as an anthropologist and
a lot of our kind of instincts
anthropologists which of course would be
super relative um
and not normative at all so uh yeah i
just sort of a comment and i'd like to
hear your reflections on whether you
think we should be being a little bit
more normative maybe in our anthropology
great great great question jonah thanks
and
there's also a comment by julio linares
in the chat which um
you can you can you can read i don't
think there's a question in there um so
over to makkah and uh to to keith mark
are you first
great um thank you so much for these
questions they are they're really great
i will try to somewhat combine them or
go through them as fast as i can uh so
yes violence as alpha says is
fundamental in the way that david is is
thinking about this right so that
monetary debt is violence is math and
violence so this is how they sort of
become real um for people and this was
very much real in the case of my own
interlocutors i think that also
especially with his proposing um in debt
or what he's getting at as well is that
there are other ways to think um outside
precisely those ideas of economic
exchange right so if we can break with
the idiom of debt that has permeated our
societies what else is there for us to
make
our social worlds possible and and i
think that something that's very
important and it ties back to deborah's
question before is that we're shifting
between these moralities and i think
this is very important in david's work
um he's not saying we need an anarchist
view he actually says there's never been
an anarchist society i don't know if
that could um could exist same for sort
of marxist ideas but he's also trying to
think about how communism isn't
capitalism is not you know the thing
that will always be and this is
particularly in the dawn of everything
something that both david's will sort of
take up uh in trying to to imagine how
this will end and something else will
will come
and in doing that historically they show
that this is not you know today
capitalism ended and tomorrow we have
something else but it will happen in our
daily lives so we do make it
how that happens is yet to be seen but
that's sort of the invitation as well
how do we want that to happen
um
regarding monica's question super
important thank you so much monica um
definitely important work from lots of
feminist uh latin american scholars
caballero and gaga are economists and
they're approaching that
mainly thinking about extractivist
economies as well and i think that care
and labor
would become especially important david
does a lot of reflection with that but
in the work of the pa it was it
qualified itself as a feminist movement
and the idea was what happens if we put
care at the center of what we do right
so instead of thinking about paying back
the bank you use that money for um
caring for your children and that's what
you should be doing right so how do we
shift those uh organizations of our
daily life and i do take this
um part in my in my understanding of how
to think about what that means
um and last in jonah's uh question uh i
think that the same happens with freedom
and both davids do this they mention
three freedoms but they say there's a
shifting between them right so we're
never just in one of those freedoms so
we are constantly moving and this is
what allows us
to build something new that we're not
and we don't have to sign up to one
thing that we have delineated is how we
would like things to be
for everyone
all the time but rather that there is a
lot of back and forth between those and
i think that's why anthropology and
ethnography is so important because
we're able to see how that happens in
the graph how are people moving between
these moral
economies or ideas
of how moral morality plays out how do
we move um along those freedoms and what
spaces
open up right so if we take care into
account if we take violence into account
if we put our social relationships at
the center what could come out right and
i think that this is where ethnography
does show us the spaces where this is is
happening so we can actually do things
different
thanks thank you maka um keith uh if
you'd like to have uh
just address whatever you would like of
those three comments and we will then
close yeah okay i mean
i mean i have you know
deborah is a is an old friend of mine
and
we share many interests and
i have never uh i mean i think her work
on debt in south africa is a brilliant
realization of how people on the ground
experience it but she basically cops out
from
from saying how this has got anything to
do with south african political economy
uh
so
i don't privilege grand theorization for
its own sake in fact unless i can
realize what i have to say
in concrete
terms that are personally
accessible
i've just written the book that's coming
out in spring
it's uh
300 pages and and
almost all of it
is illustrated by anecdotes
personal or otherwise
so uh
and i think that the interesting
question that came up was about uh why
do people i mean which is the original
question of the book
uh why do people uh feel that they
should pay back a debt
and david has some very
i mean you know the answer to this is in
the chapter on the moral grounds of
economic relations where he says there
are
people left to their own devices share
in a freeway and he calls everyday
communism
and then you have reciprocity uh
and and finally hierarchy but uh he he
he says the hierarchy and um
and reciprocity are both
transformations of the idea of death
the difference is that in hierarchy the
debt is permanent
and in reciprocity the debt is
presumptively
temporary
david hated
reciprocity
and it led him to some great
funny observation why did the middle
classes chat
train their children to say please and
thank you
you know because
you know saying please or or
thank you immediately already limits the
scope of the debt and and and kind of
reasserts your desire to
to be on the other side of the equation
so
i mean the the but partly i think this
the problem of this analysis which comes
up a lot in his work he talks about we
why is it we do this
there is it's not it's often not
specified in sociological terms who who
we are
and i i i can only offer you know my own
experience in the 1970s which was the
first post-war housing group and i was
married with no money
and in the space of eight years
bought and sold five houses and ended up
with 250 000
uh uh
pounds in equity
and uh you know and all my friends were
have been trained
uh to fear that
and uh and i realized that as long as
the housing boom went
i could
take a loan that i couldn't afford and
then sell again as soon as things have
gone quick enough pay off the debt and
end up with more capital and do it again
i did this five times in a decade
uh
and everybody else said i was even my
wife said you know this is terrible
we're going to end up in texas prison we
can't afford this
and i said don't worry you know it's not
going to break yet
so so so
this is where debt and credit
kind of turn around i mean if
i mean you know i mean i will say this
uh the the the recipe for
viable and progressive social democracy
in the 20th century especially after the
second world war
uh
was um
was mild inflation
mild inflation gave people
the idea that their property was
increasing in value
uh
they committed to it and uh
i mean you know that that was really you
know as long as you know i mean
keynes wrote a beautiful book called you
know the economics of persuasion
in which he says who benefits from
inflation
debtors
who loses from
uh inflation
uh
bankers and savers
and money you know so so so so that the
the relationship between credit and that
has been
historically i mean where do you think
the english-speaking people
came up with the idea own a house and
you make money
i mean there wasn't a society in the
world before the mid 20th century in
which that i did you know americans
always feared only only houses until
quite recently because of the costs of
maintenance and so on
so i think this
this question
uh
which is the central question
uh deserves probably more
uh treatment than we gave it today but i
was asked
to give speak for 20 minutes
on
on the biggest historical book he ever
wrote
and i felt it was obliged i was obliged
to
to deal with it in his terms
as well
you did a grand job and and maka you
amazing thank you for sharing
uh and your presentations thank you
everybody for coming your questions your
engagement it's wonderful to see you all
and we hope to see you again next week
at 11 o'clock uh we usually we will
close this session but for anyone who
wants to stay on for an informal session
just come back to the same call in a
couple of minutes
um
and we can hang out for for a little bit
longer
10 15 minutes more
okay
lovely to see you all thank you thank
you everybody thank you maka thank you
keith thank you thank you everyone